# Pinhole camera

Rays from an object in the world pass through a pinhole to form an inverted
image on on the back face of a box with a pinhole in it.

* **Optical centre**. The location of the pinhole.
* **Image plane**. The 2D plane on which the image is projected. In real life
this is "behind" the pinhole with the image upside down, however this plane is
usually displayed "in front" of the pinhole so the image is the right way up.
* **Optical axis**. The plane along which the optical centre and the image plane
lie.
* **Principal point**. The point where the image plane and the optical axis
intersect.
* **Focal length**. The length from the optical centre to the principal point.

The pinhole camera model is a [generative model](202210171325.md) that describes
the likelihood $P(\bold{x}|\bold{w})$ of observing a feature at position
$\bold{x} = [x,y]^{\top}$ in the image, given that it is the projection of a 3D
point $\bold{w} = [u,v,w]^{\top}$ in the world.

The task is to establish the position $\bold{x} = [x, y]^{\top}$ where the 3D
point $\bold{w} = [u, v, w]^{\top}$ is imaged.

A simple model where the focal length is 1 and the image plane is centred at the
principal point is known as a *normalized camera*. Using similar triangles, we
can see that

$$
\begin{align*}
x &= \frac{u}{w} \\[1em]
y &= \frac{v}{w} \\
\end{align*}
$$

A normalized camera is unrealistic, so the mapping between $\bold{w}$ and
$\bold{x}$ needs to be changed by a constant scaling factor $\phi$, which may be
different in the $x$ and $y$ directions

$$
\begin{align*}
x &= \frac{\phi_x u}{w} \\[1em]
y &= \frac{\phi_y v}{w} \\
\end{align*}
$$

$\phi_x$ and $\phi_y$ are known as *focal length parameters*.

We need to introduce a skew term $\gamma$ to account for the fact that the
image plane may not be perpendicular to the principal ray. Also need an offset
term $\delta$ to account for that fact that the normalized camera assumes that
pixel $(0,0)$ is where the principal ray strikes the image plane (not
normally the case). So we get

$$
\begin{align*}
x &= \frac{\phi_x u + \gamma v}{w} + \delta_x \\[1em]
y &= \frac{\phi_y v}{w} + \delta_y \\
\end{align*}
$$

Finally, $\bold{w}$ is generally not expressed in the frame of reference of the
camera. Transform using a 3D transformation

$$
\begin{bmatrix} u' \\ v' \\ w' \end{bmatrix} =
\begin{bmatrix}
\omega_{11} & \omega_{12} & \omega_{13} \\
\omega_{21} & \omega_{22} & \omega_{23} \\
\omega_{31} & \omega_{32} & \omega_{33} \\
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix} u \\ v \\ w \end{bmatrix} +
\begin{bmatrix} \tau_x \\ \tau_y \\ \tau_z \end{bmatrix}
$$

or

$$
\bold{w}' = \boldsymbol{\Omega} \bold{w} + \boldsymbol{\tau}
$$

