# Confidence intervals

Often, parameters of a population are estimated based on a sample. E.g. the
average height of people in America might be estimated from the average height
from a sample of 200 people.

We want to know a range in which the true value of the parameter will lie with a
high probability. This range is called the confidence interval. Often 95% or 99%
is used.

We can characterise the whole distribution of the [sample mean](202210201358) $\overline{X}$ if each
$X_i \backsim N\left( \mu, \sigma^2 \right)$:

$$
\overline{X} \backsim N\left( \mu, \frac{\sigma^2}{n} \right)
$$

This leads us to the following [pivot](202210201406):

$$
\frac{\overline{X} -\mu}{\sqrt{\sigma^2/n}} \backsim N(0,1)
$$

Now that we know the distribution of this [statistic](202210101627), we can make
probabilistic statements such as:

$$
P\left( \frac{\overline{X} - \mu}{\sqrt{\sigma^2/n}} \le 1.5 \right) = 
P(Z \le 1.5) \approx 0.93
$$

Here we are using the CDF of the standard normal distribution. Using this
result, we may claim that

$$
\tag{1.0} P\left( \mu \ge \overline{X} - \frac{1.5\sigma}{\sqrt{n} } \right) \approx 0.93
$$

$(1.0)$ states that regardless of what the value of $\mu$ is, if the sample
size is $n$ and he data follows a $N(\mu, \sigma^2)$ distribution, then, in the
limit of infinite repetitions of the dataset, the interval $[\overline{X} -
1.5\sigma/\sqrt{n} , \infty)$ will contain $\mu$ approx 93% of the time.

Or alternatively, the **[coverage](202210201423)** of the interval is 93%.

Typically we'll form a two-sided interval of the following form for the mean if
the data is from a known [Gaussian distribution](202210091114):

$$
\left[ \overline{X} + z_{0.025}\sigma/\sqrt{n}, \overline{X} +
z_{0.975}\sigma/\sqrt{n}  \right]
$$

Here, we are assuming that the [variance](202210081517) is known. If it's not, we can consider:

$$
\frac{\overline{X} - \mu}{\sqrt{S^2/n}} \backsim \mathcal{T}(n-1), \hspace{3em}
S^2 = \frac{1}{n - 1}\sum_{i=1}^{n} (X_i - \overline{X})^2
$$

Where $\mathcal{T}$ is the [student t-distribution](202210200938) and $S^2$ is
the sample variance. Note that when $n$ is large enough, we can treat this as a
Gaussian thanks to the [central limit theorem](202210151509).

Should always think of confidence intervals as approximate confidence intervals,
e.g. when using the CLT approach, which models for $N \rightarrow \infty$, $N$
will of course never be $\infty$ as we have a finite number of samples.
