# Hypothesis testing

A way to check any assumptions made are reasonable.

Start by [stating the hypothesis](202210151254.md) that we're trying to test, e.g. is the
probability of the event of any given student on a stats course being female
0.5? This is known as the *null hypothesis*.

The general approach is to assume that the null hypothesis is true. Under this
assumption, what is the probability of observing the observable data? We need a
way of tackling this question. Our observed data for the stats course is that 15
out of 40 students were female.

To do so we use a test [statistic](202210101627.md), a summary of the data which
can falsify the null hypothesis (if it is indeed false). How do we pick a test
statistic?

In this example, we could say that the number of female students in the class
provides a summary for the proportion of female students interested in stats.

Further to the null hypothesis, we often need to make further assumptions to
characterise the test statistic. For our example, we will assume that each
student decides to enrol on the course independently.

In this example we could model this as a collection of independent
[Bernoulli random variables](202210081010.md), with 0 being for males, 1 for
females, and our assumed 0.5 for $p$
$$
Y_1, \ldots, Y_{40} \backsim \text{Bern}(0.5)
$$
Therefore the sum of these variables is [binomially distributed](202210081358.md)
$$
X \equiv \sum_{i=1}^{40} Y_i \backsim \text{Bin}(40, 0.5)
$$

Now we can check whether the observed statistic is likely or unlikely under our
the null hypothesis $\text{H}_0: \theta = 0.5$ by characterising how probable
values of $X$ of size 15 or smaller are
- We assumed that $\theta$ is not greater than 0.5
- Values of $X$ less than or equal to 15 are therefore all of those which are as
  or more extreme than our observation

The probability of obtaining the results as or more extreme than that observed,
assuming $H_0$ is true, is the **[p-value](202210151020.md)**
$$
\begin{align*}
p &\equiv P(X \le 15; H_0) \\[0.5em]
p &= \sum_{x=0}^{15} \binom{40}{x}0.5^x(1-0.5)^{40-x} \\[1em]
&\approx 0.07
\end{align*}
$$
So the probability of seeing 15 or fewer female students in this class is 0.07.
Normally, a decision threshold is set and if it's really unlikely to observe
something as or more extreme, then we'll reject the null hypothesis. If the
probability is above the threshold, then we typically keep the null hypothesis.
Now the question is [how do we set the threshold](202210151146.md)?

The unwritten logic of hypothesis testing is that:
- $H_0$ should imply with high probability the data values which we observe
- If instead we observe sufficiently extreme values under $H_0$ we may consider
  $H_0$ to have been disproved by informal [contrapositive](202210151047.md) argument.

If we observe unusual data, there is an indication that something within our
assumptions is awry, maybe our assumption of a Binomial distribution was wrong.

Rather than determining a p-value, we may determine a *critical region*, the set
of all test statistic values that would cause us to reject $H_0$.

Check out the [Hypothesis testing procedure](202210151102.md) for a typical flow of
hypothesis testing.
